---
title: "06 - Analyze"
author: Jeffrey W. Hollister
layout: post_page
---
The focus of this workshop hasn't really been statistics, its been more about R, the language.  But, it is pretty much impossible to talk a lot about R without getting into stats, as that is what draws most people to R in the first place.  So, we will spend a little bit of time on it.  In this lesson we will touch on some very simple stats that we can do with base R as well as provide a quick (i.e. top of my head as I write this) list of what can be done in base R.  The second section will run through a quick example of using a package, `randomForest` for some analysis.  I've included this section just to show how (relatively) trivial it is to add an advanced capability to R via packages.

#Quick Links to Exercises and R code
- [Lesson 4 R Code](/gedr/rmd_posts/2015-01-14-06-Analyze.R): All the code from this post in an R Script.
- [Exercise 1](#exercise-1): Run some basic statistical test and build a simple model with the NLA data
- [Exercise 2](#exercise-2): Use random forests to predict NLA condition class. 

##Lesson Goals
- Conduct basic statistical analyses with base R
- Get a taste of wide array of analyses in base R
- Understand how to add statistical functionality to R via packages

##Base statistics
The capabilities that come out of the box with R and actually quite good and used to cost you quite a bit to get access to.  Now it all comes for free!  Some of the things you can do with R without any additional packages inlcude, logistic regression (and all manner of generalized linear models), correlation, principle components analysis, chi-squared tests, clustering, loess, multivariate analysis of variance ...  In short, we can do a lot without moving of out base r and `stats`.

We will talk about a few analyses just to show the tip of the iceberg of what is available.

### t-tests
### ANOVA
### Correlation
### Linear Models
### Logistic Regression

##Excercise 1
1. Any differences in means based on man made vs natural
2. Linear model of chla

##Contributed Packages - Example with `randomForest`

Describe Random Forests

Great way to build robust predictive models that are not subject to the assumptions of classic statistics.  Tend to produce more reliable results.

#Exercise 2
1. Get Random Forest set up
2. Can we predict ref, so-so, and trash?
